feat: improvements on docs (#24)
waku-org/waku.guide: docs/Concepts/4.md

---
title: Discovery & Bootstrap Nodes
---

Node discovery is the mechanism that enables a Waku node to find other nodes.

When starting a Waku node, it needs to connect to other nodes to be able to send, receive and retrieve messages.
This means there needs to be a discovery mechanism that enables finding other nodes when its initially not connected to any nodes.
This process is called _bootstrapping_.

Once connected, the node needs to find additional peers to have:

- Enough peers in the Waku Relay mesh (target is 6),
- Enough peers in reserve, in case current peers are overloaded or go offline,
- Peers with specific Waku capabilities (e.g. Store, Light Push, Filter).

## Default Bootstrap Mechanism

> The default bootstrap mechanism is to connect to the Status' nim-waku prod fleet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default bootstrap mechanism is to connect to the Status' nwaku prod fleet.
```

> You can find more information on how to configure your application/service to use this in the language-specific documentation: [js-waku](https://github.com/waku-org/js-waku), [nim-waku](https://github.com/status-im/nwaku) and [go-waku](https://github.com/waku-org/go-waku)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

There will/should be a global way/link to access implementaiton specific doc which is not finalized at this stage.
Introducing links now means more links to update soon so I'd refrain from now.

## Predefined Bootstrap Nodes

> Addresses of nodes hosted by Status are [predefined in the codebase](https://github.com/status-im/js-waku/blob/e4024d5c7246535ddab28a4262006915d2db58be/src/lib/discovery/predefined.ts#L48):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An application using Waku can hardcode the addresses of bootstrap nodes directly in their codebase.
```

No need to assume it's Status nodes: they could have deployed their own node, etc.

**Pros:**

- Low latency
- Low resource requirements

**Cons:**

- Prone to censorship: node IPs can be blocked
- Limited: Static number of nodes
- Poor maintainability: Code needs to be changed to update the list

## Use your own nodes

Developers have the choice to run their own [nwaku](https://github.com/status-im/nim-waku/) nodes. Read [Nwaku Service Node](https://github.com/status-im/nwaku/tree/master/docs/operators) to learn how to run your own node.

Once you have started your nwaku node(s), you could decide to pass a list of predefined nodes as a way to bootstrap your own node.

**Pros:**

- Low latency
- Low resource requirements

**Cons:**

- Prone to censorship: node IPs can be blocked
- Limited: Static number of nodes

> - Poor maintainability: Code needs to be changed to update the list

Reviewer: ah, I see what was there. I'd just remove this section and focus on peer discovery mechanisms.

## DNS Discovery

[EIP-1459: Node Discovery via DNS](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1459) has been implemented in js-waku, nwaku and go-waku with some modification on the [ENR format](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/31/).

DNS Discovery enables anyone to register an ENR tree in the `TXT` field of a domain name.

_ENR_ is the format used to store node connection details (IP, port, multiaddr, etc).

This enables a separation of software development and operations as dApp developers can include one or several domain names to use for DNS discovery, while operators can handle the update of the dns record.

It also enables more decentralized bootstrapping as anyone can register a domain name and publish it for others to use.

**Pros:**

- Low latency, low resource requirements,
- Bootstrap list can be updated by editing a domain name: no code change is needed,
- Can reference to a greater list of nodes by pointing to other domain names in the code or in the ENR tree.

**Cons:**

- Prone to censorship: domain names can be blocked,
- Limited: Static number of nodes, operators must provide their ENR to the domain owner to get their node listed.

> ## Other Discovery Mechanisms

Reviewer: Can be removed for now.

Author: Just the cons? Or also the pros?

Reviewer: The whole "Other Discovery Mechanisms" section

Other discovery mechanisms such as gossipsub peer exchange, discv5, etc are currently being research and developed.

They aim to improve the current _status quo_ in the following aspects:

- More decentralized mechanisms: Less reliance on specific entities,

- Less setup for node operators: Enabling their nodes to be discovered by connecting to bootstrap nodes,

without having to update a domain name.

> ### Discv5

Reviewer: Can we have a Pros/cons table like the other sections?

As Discv5 uses [DHT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributed_hash_table) to store ENR records, it is more resilient to censorship than DNS discovery.
And one of the main benefits of DHTs is offering a global view over participating nodes. This, in turn, allows sampling random sets of nodes which is important for equally distributing load.

Without discv5 and similar methods, the bootstrap nodes are used as part of the gossipsub mesh. This might put heavy load on these nodes and further, might open pathways to inference attacks. Discv5, on the other hand, uses the bootstrap nodes merely as an entry to the discovery network and can provide random sets of nodes (sampled from a global view) for bootstrapping or expanding the mesh.

### Peer Exchange

While discv5 based ambient peer discovery has many desirable properties, resource restricted nodes and nodes behind restrictive NAT setups cannot run discv5 satisfactory.
With these nodes in mind, [Peer Exchange](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/34/) was introduced.

The main purpose of this protocol is providing resource restricted devices with peers.

> The peer exchange protocol will allow resource restricted nodes (light nodes) to ask for peers from other nodes in the network. This will allow light nodes to bootstrap and expand their mesh without relying on discv5 or bootstrap nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The peer exchange protocol allows resource restricted nodes (light nodes) to ask for peers from other nodes in the network. This allows light nodes to bootstrap and expand their mesh without relying on discv5 or bootstrap nodes.
```

Also, can we have a Pros/Cons section?

---
title: Discovery & Bootstrap Nodes
---

Node discovery is the mechanism that enables a Waku node to find other nodes.

When starting a Waku node, it needs to connect to other nodes to be able to send, receive and retrieve messages.
This means there needs to be a discovery mechanism that enables finding other nodes when its initially not connected to any nodes.
This process is called _bootstrapping_.

Once connected, the node needs to find additional peers to have:

- Enough peers in the Waku Relay mesh (target is 6),
- Enough peers in reserve, in case current peers are overloaded or go offline,
- Peers with specific Waku capabilities (e.g. Store, Light Push, Filter).

## Default Bootstrap Mechanism

> The default bootstrap mechanism is to connect to the Status' nwaku prod fleet.

Reviewer: There is no default bootstrap mechanism from a Waku point of view, this section should be removed.

## Predefined Bootstrap Nodes

An application using Waku can hardcode the addresses of bootstrap nodes directly in their codebase.

**Pros:**

- Low latency
- Low resource requirements

**Cons:**

- Prone to censorship: node IPs can be blocked
- Limited: Static number of nodes
- Poor maintainability: Code needs to be changed to update the list

## Use your own nodes

Developers have the choice to run their own [nwaku](https://github.com/status-im/nim-waku/) nodes. Read [Nwaku Service Node](https://github.com/status-im/nwaku/tree/master/docs/operators) to learn how to run your own node.

Once you have started your nwaku node(s), you could decide to pass a list of predefined nodes as a way to bootstrap your own node.

**Pros:**

- Low latency
- Low resource requirements

**Cons:**

- Prone to censorship: node IPs can be blocked
- Limited: Static number of nodes

> - Poor maintainability: Code needs to be changed to update the list

Reviewer: This section can be removed as it's covered by the `Predefined Boostrap Nodes` section.

---
title: Discovery & Bootstrap Nodes
---

Node discovery is the mechanism that enables a Waku node to find other nodes.

> When starting a Waku node, it needs to connect to other nodes to be able to send, receive and retrieve messages which means there needs to be a discovery mechanism that enable finding other nodes when not connected to any node.

Reviewer: Split the sentence, bit hard to digest.

This is called _bootstrapping_.

Once connected, the node needs to find additional peers to have:

- Enough peers in the Waku Relay mesh (target is 6),
- Enough peers in reserve, in case current peers are overloaded or go offline,
- Peers with specific Waku capabilities (e.g. Store, Light Push, Filter).

For now, we are focusing in making bootstrap discovery protocols available, research of other discovery protocols is in progress.

## Default Bootstrap Mechanism

**The default bootstrap mechanism is to connect to the Status' nim-waku prod fleet**.

To use:

```ts
const waku = await createNode({ bootstrap: { default: true } });
```

{{< hint info >}}

When creating a Waku node without passing the `bootstrap` option, the node does **not** connect to any remote peer or bootstrap node.
As the current strategy is to connect to nodes operated by Status, we want to ensure that developers consciously opt-in while providing a friendly developer experience.

We intend to change this in the future and enable bootstrap by default once we have implemented more decentralized strategies.

> {{< /hint >}}

Reviewer: Remove this section as it's implementation (js-waku) specific)

https://github.com/status-im/js-waku/blob/e4024d5c7246535ddab28a4262006915d2db58be/src/lib/discovery/predefined.ts#L48

**Pros:**

- Low latency
- Low resource requirements

**Cons:**

- Prone to censorship: node IPs can be blocked
- Limited: Static number of nodes
- Poor maintainability: Code needs to be changed to update the list

## Use your own nodes

Developers have the choice to run their own [nwaku](https://github.com/status-im/nim-waku/) nodes

and use them to bootstrap js-waku nodes.

There are two ways to set bootstrap nodes:

1. Using an array of multiaddrs (as `string` or `Multiaddr`):

```ts
import { Waku } from "js-waku";

const waku = await createNode({
  bootstrap: {
    peers: [
      "/dns4/node-01.ac-cn-hongkong-c.wakuv2.test.statusim.net/tcp/443/wss/p2p/16Uiu2HAkvWiyFsgRhuJEb9JfjYxEkoHLgnUQmr1N5mKWnYjxYRVm",
    ],
  },
});
```

2. Passing an async function that returns an array of `multiaddr` (as `string` or `Multiaddr`):

```ts
import { Waku } from "js-waku";

const waku = await createNode({
  bootstrap: {
    getPeers: async () => {
      const addresses = [];

      // Fetch the multiaddrs from somewhere...

      return addresses;
    },
  },
});
```

> {{< hint info >}}

Reviewer: Too js-waku specific, just mention that one could decide to pass a list of predefined node as a way to bootstrap their node and list pros and cons for this method.

Read [Nwaku Service Node](https://github.com/status-im/nwaku/tree/master/docs/operators) to learn how to run your own node.

{{< /hint >}}

**Pros & Cons**: Same than [Predefined Bootstrap Nodes](#predefined-bootstrap-nodes)

## DNS Discovery

[EIP-1459: Node Discovery via DNS](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1459) has been implemented in js-waku, nwaku and go-waku

with some modification on the [ENR format](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/31/).

DNS Discovery enables anyone to register an ENR tree in the `TXT` field of a domain name.

_ENR_ is the format used to store node connection details (ip, port, multiaddr, etc).

This enables a separation of software development and operations

as dApp developers can include one or several domain names to use for DNS discovery,

while operators can handle the update of the dns record.

It also enables more decentralized bootstrapping as anyone can register a domain name and publish it for others to use.

{{< hint warning >}}

While this method is implemented in js-waku,

it is currently not recommended to use due to a [bug](https://github.com/status-im/nim-waku/issues/845) in the websocket implementation of nwaku.

> {{< /hint >}}

Reviewer: Remove this

**Pros:**

- Low latency, low resource requirements,

- Bootstrap list can be updated by editing a domain name: no code change is needed,

- Can reference to a greater list of nodes by pointing to other domain names in the code or in the ENR tree.

**Cons:**

- Prone to censorship: domain names can be blocked,

- Limited: Static number of nodes, operators must provide their ENR to the domain owner to get their node listed.

## Other Discovery Mechanisms

Other discovery mechanisms such as gossipsub peer exchange, discv5, etc are currently being research and developed.

They aim to improve the current _status quo_ in the following aspects:

- More decentralized mechanisms: Less reliance on specific entities,

- Less setup for node operators: Enabling their nodes to be discovered by connecting to bootstrap nodes,

> without having to update a domain name.

Reviewer: Explain peer exchange and discv5 with a section each please.
